README.adoc, before:

= Spring Asciidoctor Extensions
ifdef::env-github[]
:toc: preamble
:toc-title: Contents
:toclevels: 1
endif::[]
ifdef::env-browser[]
:toc: right
:toc-title: Contents
endif::[]
:url-project: https://github.com/opendevise/springio-asciidoctor-extensions
:url-chai: http://chaijs.com/api/bdd/
:url-eslint: https://eslint.org
:url-git: https://git-scm.com
:url-git-dl: {url-git}/downloads
:url-mocha: https://mochajs.org
:url-nodejs: https://nodejs.org
:url-nodejs-releases: https://github.com/nodejs/Release#release-schedule
:url-nvm: https://github.com/creationix/nvm
:url-nvm-install: {url-nvm}#installation
:url-standardjs: https://standardjs.com/rules.html

ifdef::env-npm[]
IMPORTANT: The package at @opendevise/springio-asciidoctor-extensions is only a temporary name for this package.
*Depend on it at your own risk.*
The package will be removed from this location once it has been published under its official name, @springio/asciidoctor-extensions.

endif::[]
This library provides Asciidoctor extensions that support the Spring documentation.
For now, these extensions are only designed for use with Asciidoctor.js.
The extensions evolved out of the https://github.com/spring-io/spring-asciidoctor-backends[Spring Asciidoctor backends] project.

== Extensions

This section documents the extensions that are provided by this library.

=== Code Chomping

*require name:* @springio/asciidoctor-extensions/code-chomping-extension

The code chomping extension allows specific parts of a Java, Kotlin, or Groovy source block to be removed.
The extension will not run on any other source, listing, or literal blocks.
This extension is mainly useful if you have externalized code that includes comments and annotations intended for the compiler's eyes only.

When this extension is registered, it will remove parts of the code that match chomp tags, `@Suppress` / `@SuppressWarnings` annotations, and `@formatter:on` / `@formatter:off` line comments.
You can also turn on chomping of the header (typically a Javadoc comment or license statement) and package declaration.

The following chomp tags (i.e., comments) are supported:

[%autowidth,cols=~m;~]
|===
|Comment |Description

|/**/
|Chomps the rest of the line and replaces it with `\...`

|/* @chomp:line <replacement> */
|Chomps the rest of the line and replaces it with <replacement>, which defaults to `\...`

|// @chomp:line
|Chomps (drops) this line only

|// @chomp:file
|Chomps (drops) this line to the end of the file
|===

Here's an example source block that uses code chomping:

[source,asciidoc]
....
[,java]
----
public class Example {
    private final Something something;

    private final Other other;

    public Example() {
        this.something = /**/ new MockSomething();
        this.other = /* @chomp:line your thing... */new MyThing();
    }
}
----
....

The output of this block will appear as follows:

[,java]
----
public class Example {
    private final Something something;

    private final Other other;

    public Example() {
      this.something = ...
      this.other = your thing...
    }
}
----

You can set the `chomp` AsciiDoc attribute to change the default settings.
The attribute can be set on the document or the block.
The document attribute is the default value.
The attribute value may be one of the following keywords:

[%autowidth,cols=~m;~]
|===
|Flag |Description

|default
|Enable the `tags`, `formatters`, and `suppresswarnings` operations

|all
|Enable all chomping operations

|none
|Disable all chomping operations

|tags
|Chomp the comment tags

|formatters
|Chomp any `@formatter:on` / `@formatter:off` line comments

|suppresswarnings
|Chomp any `@Suppress` or `@SuppressWarnings` annotations

|headers
|Chomp any file headers up to `package` declaration

|packages
|Chomp the package declaration, or replace the name if the `chomp-package-replacement` attribute is set
|===

Instead of dropping the package declaration, you can replace the name.
To do so, ensure the `packages` operation is enabled.
Then, set the `chomp-package-replacement` to the replacement name, such as `org.example`.
When the extension finds the package declaration, it will replace the name in the source with the replacement name you specified.

The following document is configured to update the name in the package declaration in each Java-like source file with `org.example`.

[,asciidoc]
----
= My Document
:chomp-package-replacement: org.example
----

If this attribute is set and its value is empty, the original package declaration is preserved.

=== Code Folding

*require name:* @springio/asciidoctor-extensions/code-folding-extension

The code folding extension allows non-pertinent code in a source block to be hidden on initial view.
The user can click the "`unfold`" button to reveal the hidden code.
The extension will not run on any other source, listing, or literal blocks.
This extension is mainly useful if you have externalized code that includes boilerplate lines that detract from the focus of the snippet.

When this extension is registered, all Java imports will be automatically folded.
Additional fold blocks can also be defined using fold tags.
The fold tags are `@fold:on` and `@fold:off` comment lines.

Here's an example source block that uses code folding to hide the fields on initial view:

[source,asciidoc]
....
[,java]
----
public class Example {
    // @fold:on
    private final String first;

    private final String second;
    // @fold:off

    public Example(String first, String second) {
        this.first = first;
        this.second = second;
    }
}
----
....

The `@fold:on` tag supports replacement text to show when the block is folded.
Here's an example source block that replaces the getters and setters with a comment when folded:

[source,asciidoc]
....
[,java]
----
public class Example {
    private String first;

    private String second;

    // @fold:on // getters / setters...
    public String getFirst() {
        return this.first;
    }

    public void setFirst(String first) {
        this.first = first;
    }

    public String getSecond() {
        return this.second;
    }

    public void setSecond(String second) {
        this.second = second;
    }
    // @fold:off
}
----
....

You can set the `fold` AsciiDoc attribute to change the default settings.
The attribute can be used on the document or the block.
The document attribute is the default value.
The attribute value may be one of the following keywords:

[%autowidth,cols=~m;~]
|===
|Flag |Description

|default
|Enable the `imports` and `tags` operations

|all
|Enable all folding operations

|none
|Disable all folding operations

|imports
|Fold import statements

|tags
|Fold `@fold:on` / `@fold:off` tags
|===

== Migrate Tabs Antora Extension

*require name:* @springio/asciidoctor-extensions/migrate-tabs-antora-extension

In addition to Asciidoctor extensions, this library also provides one Antora extension.
The purpose of this extension is to migrate the AsciiDoc source from using Spring tabs to using https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-tabs[Asciidoctor tabs].
It also has the ability to unwrap unneeded example blocks.

IMPORTANT: Be sure to register this extension under the `antora.extensions` key in the playbook, not the `asciidoc.extensions` key!

The extension accepts several configuration options:

save_result (default: false)::
A boolean option that controls whether the migrated source is written back to the worktree.
This option is only relevant when the file is read from a local directory, which is the case for git references that have an associated worktree.

unwrap_example_block (default: tabs)::
An enumeration option that controls when example block delimiters are removed.

* `never` - Never remove example block delimiters
* `tabs` - Migrate example block that contains tabs to a tabs block
* `always` - Remove example block delimiters if example block has no metadata and only contains a single child

tabs_delimiter_length (default: 6)::
An integer option that controls the length of the delimiter for a tabs block.
The recommended value is 6.
You can also set it to 4 to use the conventional length.

normalize (default: false)::
A boolean option that controls whether sequential empty lines are collapsed into a single empty line.
Regardless of the value of this option, the extension will relocate block metadata lines to be directly above the block.
The extension will also insert an empty line between tabs if one does not exist.

ifndef::env-npm[]
== Development Quickstart

This section provides information on how to develop on this project.

=== Prerequisites

To build this project and run the tests, you need the following software installed on your computer:

* {url-git}[git] (command: `git`)
* {url-nodejs}[Node.js] (commands: `node`, `npm`, and `npx`)

==== git

First, make sure you have git installed.

 $ git --version

If not, {url-git-dl}[download and install] the git package for your system.

==== Node.js

Next, make sure that you have Node.js installed (which also provides npm and npx).

 $ node --version

If this command fails with an error, you don't have Node.js installed.
If the command doesn't report an {url-nodejs-releases}[active LTS version] of Node.js, it means you don't have a suitable version of Node.js installed.

We strongly recommend that you use {url-nvm}[nvm] (Node Version Manager) to manage your Node.js installation(s).
Follow the {url-nvm-install}[nvm installation instructions] to set up nvm on your machine.

Once you've installed nvm, open a new terminal and install Node.js 16 using the following command:

 $ nvm install 16

You can switch to this version of Node.js at any time using the following command:

 $ nvm use 16

To make Node.js 16 the default in new terminals, type:

 $ nvm alias default 16

Now that you have git and Node.js installed, you're ready to start developing on this project.

=== Clone Project

Clone the project using git:

[subs=attributes+]
 $ git clone {url-project} &&
   cd "`basename $_`"

The previous chained command clones the project then switches to the project folder on your filesystem.
Stay in this project folder when running all subsequent commands.

=== Install Dependencies

Use npm to install the project's dependencies inside the project.
In your terminal, run the following command:

 $ npm ci

This command installs the dependencies listed in [.path]_package-lock.json_ into the [.path]_node_modules/_ folder inside the project.
This folder should _not_ be committed to the source control repository.

=== Run Tests

This project uses {url-mocha}[mocha] to run the tests and the assertion library {url-chai}[chai] to assert outcomes.
To run the test suite, use:

 $ npm test

By default, `npm test` will run all tests.
You can run the tests in a single test suite by passing the path of that test suite as the final argument:

 $ npm test test/code-chomping-extension-test.js

You can also run a single test by adding `.only` to the `it` function (e.g., `it.only`).
If `it.only` is present, `npm test` will only run that test.

To generate a coverage report when running the tests (enabled by default in CI), run the `coverage` script instead:

 $ npm run coverage

A coverage report shows the lines, statements, and branches that the tests exercise.
You can view the coverage report by opening the HTML file [.path]_reports/lcov-report/index.html_ in your browser.

=== Verify Code Style

This project adheres to the {url-standardjs}[JavaScript Standard style] with some exceptions defined in [.path]_.eslintrc_.
The code style is verified using {url-eslint}[ESLint].

To verify that the style of the code is correct, run the following command:

 $ npm run lint

To format the code to adhere to the code style, run the following command:

 $ npm run format

The CI workflow will fail if there are pending code style changes, so be sure to run it before you push a change.

=== Use Project From Source

If you want to use the project locally before it is published, you can specify the path to the project as the version in [.path]_package.json_.

[,json]
----
"dependencies": {
  "@opendevise/springio-asciidoctor-extensions": "/path/to/project"
}
----

When you run `npm i` in that project, npm will set up a symlink to the location of this project.
Any changes to this project will take affect immediately.

endif::[]
== License

Use of this software is granted under the terms of the https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License, Version 2.0] (Apache-2.0).
ifdef::env-github[See link:LICENSE[] to find the full license text.]

Commit message:

finish updating info to reflect transfer to spring-io organization
* remove notice in README
* add prerequisites and install sections to README
* fix package name

README.adoc, after:

= Spring Asciidoctor Extensions
ifdef::env-github[]
:toc: preamble
:toc-title: Contents
:toclevels: 1
endif::[]
ifdef::env-browser[]
:toc: right
:toc-title: Contents
endif::[]
:url-project: https://github.com/spring-io/asciidoctor-extensions
:url-chai: http://chaijs.com/api/bdd/
:url-eslint: https://eslint.org
:url-git: https://git-scm.com
:url-git-dl: {url-git}/downloads
:url-mocha: https://mochajs.org
:url-nodejs: https://nodejs.org
:url-nodejs-releases: https://github.com/nodejs/Release#release-schedule
:url-nvm: https://github.com/creationix/nvm
:url-nvm-install: {url-nvm}#installation
:url-standardjs: https://standardjs.com/rules.html

This library provides Asciidoctor extensions that support the Spring documentation.
For now, these extensions are only designed for use with Asciidoctor.js.
The extensions evolved out of the https://github.com/spring-io/spring-asciidoctor-backends[Spring Asciidoctor backends] project.

== Prerequisites

In order to use this extension, you must have Node.js 16 or higher installed on your machine.
These extensions are intended to be used with Asciidoctor.js.
Since this project does not declare Asciidoctor.js as a dependency to afford you flexibility, you must have Asciidoctor.js 2.2 or higher installed in your project.

Use the following command to install the @springio/asciidoctor-extensions package into your project:

[,console]
----
$ npm i @springio/asciidoctor-extensions
----

ifndef::env-npm[]
To use the development version instead, refer to the <<Development Quickstart>>.

endif::[]
The following two sections introduce the extensions provided by this library and how to activate them.

== Extensions

This section documents the extensions that are provided by this library.

=== Code Chomping

*require name:* @springio/asciidoctor-extensions/code-chomping-extension

The code chomping extension allows specific parts of a Java, Kotlin, or Groovy source block to be removed.
The extension will not run on any other source, listing, or literal blocks.
This extension is mainly useful if you have externalized code that includes comments and annotations intended for the compiler's eyes only.

When this extension is registered, it will remove parts of the code that match chomp tags, `@Suppress` / `@SuppressWarnings` annotations, and `@formatter:on` / `@formatter:off` line comments.
You can also turn on chomping of the header (typically a Javadoc comment or license statement) and package declaration.

The following chomp tags (i.e., comments) are supported:

[%autowidth,cols=~m;~]
|===
|Comment |Description

|/**/
|Chomps the rest of the line and replaces it with `\...`

|/* @chomp:line <replacement> */
|Chomps the rest of the line and replaces it with <replacement>, which defaults to `\...`

|// @chomp:line
|Chomps (drops) this line only

|// @chomp:file
|Chomps (drops) this line to the end of the file
|===

Here's an example source block that uses code chomping:

[source,asciidoc]
....
[,java]
----
public class Example {
    private final Something something;

    private final Other other;

    public Example() {
        this.something = /**/ new MockSomething();
        this.other = /* @chomp:line your thing... */new MyThing();
    }
}
----
....

The output of this block will appear as follows:

[,java]
----
public class Example {
    private final Something something;

    private final Other other;

    public Example() {
      this.something = ...
      this.other = your thing...
    }
}
----

You can set the `chomp` AsciiDoc attribute to change the default settings.
The attribute can be set on the document or the block.
The document attribute is the default value.
The attribute value may be one of the following keywords:

[%autowidth,cols=~m;~]
|===
|Flag |Description

|default
|Enable the `tags`, `formatters`, and `suppresswarnings` operations

|all
|Enable all chomping operations

|none
|Disable all chomping operations

|tags
|Chomp the comment tags

|formatters
|Chomp any `@formatter:on` / `@formatter:off` line comments

|suppresswarnings
|Chomp any `@Suppress` or `@SuppressWarnings` annotations

|headers
|Chomp any file headers up to `package` declaration

|packages
|Chomp the package declaration, or replace the name if the `chomp-package-replacement` attribute is set
|===

Instead of dropping the package declaration, you can replace the name.
To do so, ensure the `packages` operation is enabled.
Then, set the `chomp-package-replacement` to the replacement name, such as `org.example`.
When the extension finds the package declaration, it will replace the name in the source with the replacement name you specified.

The following document is configured to update the name in the package declaration in each Java-like source file with `org.example`.

[,asciidoc]
----
= My Document
:chomp-package-replacement: org.example
----

If this attribute is set and its value is empty, the original package declaration is preserved.

=== Code Folding

*require name:* @springio/asciidoctor-extensions/code-folding-extension

The code folding extension allows non-pertinent code in a source block to be hidden on initial view.
The user can click the "`unfold`" button to reveal the hidden code.
The extension will not run on any other source, listing, or literal blocks.
This extension is mainly useful if you have externalized code that includes boilerplate lines that detract from the focus of the snippet.

When this extension is registered, all Java imports will be automatically folded.
Additional fold blocks can also be defined using fold tags.
The fold tags are `@fold:on` and `@fold:off` comment lines.

Here's an example source block that uses code folding to hide the fields on initial view:

[source,asciidoc]
....
[,java]
----
public class Example {
    // @fold:on
    private final String first;

    private final String second;
    // @fold:off

    public Example(String first, String second) {
        this.first = first;
        this.second = second;
    }
}
----
....

The `@fold:on` tag supports replacement text to show when the block is folded.
Here's an example source block that replaces the getters and setters with a comment when folded:

[source,asciidoc]
....
[,java]
----
public class Example {
    private String first;

    private String second;

    // @fold:on // getters / setters...
    public String getFirst() {
        return this.first;
    }

    public void setFirst(String first) {
        this.first = first;
    }

    public String getSecond() {
        return this.second;
    }

    public void setSecond(String second) {
        this.second = second;
    }
    // @fold:off
}
----
....

You can set the `fold` AsciiDoc attribute to change the default settings.
The attribute can be used on the document or the block.
The document attribute is the default value.
The attribute value may be one of the following keywords:

[%autowidth,cols=~m;~]
|===
|Flag |Description

|default
|Enable the `imports` and `tags` operations

|all
|Enable all folding operations

|none
|Disable all folding operations

|imports
|Fold import statements

|tags
|Fold `@fold:on` / `@fold:off` tags
|===

== Migrate Tabs Antora Extension

*require name:* @springio/asciidoctor-extensions/migrate-tabs-antora-extension

In addition to Asciidoctor extensions, this library also provides one Antora extension.
The purpose of this extension is to migrate the AsciiDoc source from using Spring tabs to using https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-tabs[Asciidoctor tabs].
It also has the ability to unwrap unneeded example blocks.

IMPORTANT: Be sure to register this extension under the `antora.extensions` key in the playbook, not the `asciidoc.extensions` key!

The extension accepts several configuration options:

save_result (default: false)::
A boolean option that controls whether the migrated source is written back to the worktree.
This option is only relevant when the file is read from a local directory, which is the case for git references that have an associated worktree.

unwrap_example_block (default: tabs)::
An enumeration option that controls when example block delimiters are removed.

* `never` - Never remove example block delimiters
* `tabs` - Migrate example block that contains tabs to a tabs block
* `always` - Remove example block delimiters if example block has no metadata and only contains a single child

tabs_delimiter_length (default: 6)::
An integer option that controls the length of the delimiter for a tabs block.
The recommended value is 6.
You can also set it to 4 to use the conventional length.

normalize (default: false)::
A boolean option that controls whether sequential empty lines are collapsed into a single empty line.
Regardless of the value of this option, the extension will relocate block metadata lines to be directly above the block.
The extension will also insert an empty line between tabs if one does not exist.

ifndef::env-npm[]
== Development Quickstart

This section provides information on how to develop on this project.

=== Prerequisites

To build this project and run the tests, you need the following software installed on your computer:

* {url-git}[git] (command: `git`)
* {url-nodejs}[Node.js] (commands: `node`, `npm`, and `npx`)

==== git

First, make sure you have git installed.

 $ git --version

If not, {url-git-dl}[download and install] the git package for your system.

==== Node.js

Next, make sure that you have Node.js installed (which also provides npm and npx).

 $ node --version

If this command fails with an error, you don't have Node.js installed.
If the command doesn't report an {url-nodejs-releases}[active LTS version] of Node.js, it means you don't have a suitable version of Node.js installed.

We strongly recommend that you use {url-nvm}[nvm] (Node Version Manager) to manage your Node.js installation(s).
Follow the {url-nvm-install}[nvm installation instructions] to set up nvm on your machine.

Once you've installed nvm, open a new terminal and install Node.js 16 using the following command:

 $ nvm install 16

You can switch to this version of Node.js at any time using the following command:

 $ nvm use 16

To make Node.js 16 the default in new terminals, type:

 $ nvm alias default 16

Now that you have git and Node.js installed, you're ready to start developing on this project.

=== Clone Project

Clone the project using git:

[subs=attributes+]
 $ git clone {url-project} &&
   cd "`basename $_`"

The previous chained command clones the project then switches to the project folder on your filesystem.
Stay in this project folder when running all subsequent commands.

=== Install Dependencies

Use npm to install the project's dependencies inside the project.
In your terminal, run the following command:

 $ npm ci

This command installs the dependencies listed in [.path]_package-lock.json_ into the [.path]_node_modules/_ folder inside the project.
This folder should _not_ be committed to the source control repository.

=== Run Tests

This project uses {url-mocha}[mocha] to run the tests and the assertion library {url-chai}[chai] to assert outcomes.
To run the test suite, use:

 $ npm test

By default, `npm test` will run all tests.
You can run the tests in a single test suite by passing the path of that test suite as the final argument:

 $ npm test test/code-chomping-extension-test.js

You can also run a single test by adding `.only` to the `it` function (e.g., `it.only`).
If `it.only` is present, `npm test` will only run that test.

To generate a coverage report when running the tests (enabled by default in CI), run the `coverage` script instead:

 $ npm run coverage

A coverage report shows the lines, statements, and branches that the tests exercise.
You can view the coverage report by opening the HTML file [.path]_reports/lcov-report/index.html_ in your browser.

=== Verify Code Style

This project adheres to the {url-standardjs}[JavaScript Standard style] with some exceptions defined in [.path]_.eslintrc_.
The code style is verified using {url-eslint}[ESLint].

To verify that the style of the code is correct, run the following command:

 $ npm run lint

To format the code to adhere to the code style, run the following command:

 $ npm run format

The CI workflow will fail if there are pending code style changes, so be sure to run it before you push a change.

=== Use Project From Source

If you want to use the project locally before it is published, you can specify the path to the project as the version in [.path]_package.json_.

[,json]
----
"dependencies": {
  "@springio/asciidoctor-extensions": "/path/to/project"
}
----

When you run `npm i` in that project, npm will set up a symlink to the location of this project.
Any changes to this project will take affect immediately.

endif::[]
== License

Use of this software is granted under the terms of the https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0[Apache License, Version 2.0] (Apache-2.0).
ifdef::env-github[See link:LICENSE[] to find the full license text.]
